Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
medical gas supply and storage. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What are the medical gases used in anaesthesia,
and how are they supplied to the point of use?
The medical gases used in anaesthesia and critical care are principally oxygen,
nitrous oxide, air and, increasingly, carbon dioxide,
helium and the anaesthetic vapours carried in them,
together with the medical vacuum that supports them,
and they reach the point of use either from a central pipeline or from cylinders
attached to the anaesthetic machine.
Oxygen is the essential gas, required for every patient.
Nitrous oxide is used as a carrier and analgesic agent.
Medical air is used as a carrier gas free of the effects of nitrous oxide and to
drive certain tools, and a separate higher-pressure surgical air supply drives
pneumatic instruments. The gases are supplied by two complementary routes.
The piped medical gas and vacuum system distributes gases from a central bulk
source through fixed pipework to terminal outlets at each anaesthetic and patient
location, delivering them at a regulated working pressure of about four bar;
this is the primary supply for routine work.
Cylinders attached directly to the anaesthetic machine provide a backup supply
should the pipeline fail, and the means of delivering gases where no pipeline
exists, as in transport and remote sites.
The safe supply of these gases depends on a system of engineering safeguards —
colour coding, non-interchangeable connectors, pressure regulation,
and alarms — designed to ensure that the correct gas at the correct pressure
reaches the patient and that failure is detected.
So the medical gases are oxygen, nitrous oxide, air, and others,
supplied either through a piped system from a central bulk source at a regulated
four bar, or from cylinders on the anaesthetic machine as backup and for remote
use, all protected by an array of engineering safety features.
Describe the cylinder as a means of gas storage — its construction and
identification.
The gas cylinder is the traditional and still essential means of storing and
transporting medical gases under pressure,
and its construction and identification are designed for safety and for the
prevention of misconnection.
Cylinders are constructed to withstand high internal pressure,
traditionally from molybdenum steel and increasingly from lighter aluminium alloy
with a fibre or composite wrapping,
the latter being lighter and useful for transport.
They are manufactured and periodically tested to stringent standards,
including pressure testing, and are marked with the test dates and specifications.
A range of sizes is available, designated by letters,
from the small cylinders attached to the anaesthetic machine to the large cylinders
used in manifolds, the contents increasing with size.
Identification is by a system of colour coding and labelling:
the cylinder body and shoulder are coloured to indicate the gas,
with the shoulder colour being the definitive indicator under the current
international scheme — for instance white for oxygen,
and the body increasingly being a uniform colour with the shoulder identifying the
gas.
Crucially, the colour is an aid, not the sole means of identification;
the label is the definitive identifier, stating the gas, its volume,
batch and expiry.
The cylinder valve at the top controls the flow and bears the pin-index
configuration that prevents attachment of the wrong gas.
So cylinders are high-pressure vessels of steel or aluminium-composite
construction, manufactured and tested to strict standards in a range of lettered
sizes, identified by shoulder colour coding and, definitively, by their label,
with a pin-indexed valve — all designed for the safe storage and unmistakable
identification of each gas.
How is oxygen stored, both as compressed gas and as liquid?
Oxygen is stored in two distinct ways depending on the scale of the requirement —
as a compressed gas in cylinders for smaller and backup supplies,
and as a liquid in a vacuum-insulated evaporator for the bulk hospital supply — the
choice reflecting oxygen's physical properties.
Because oxygen has a critical temperature far below room temperature,
about minus one hundred and eighteen degrees Celsius,
it cannot be liquefied by pressure at room temperature and is therefore stored in
cylinders entirely as a compressed gas,
at a pressure of around one hundred and thirty-seven bar when full;
the cylinder pressure falls steadily as the gas is used,
so the gauge indicates the contents.
For the large quantities a hospital requires,
storing oxygen as compressed gas would need an impractical number of cylinders,
so the bulk supply is stored as liquid oxygen in a vacuum-insulated evaporator.
To remain liquid, oxygen must be kept below its critical temperature,
so it is stored very cold, around minus one hundred and sixty to minus one hundred
and eighty degrees Celsius, in a large vessel insulated by a vacuum jacket,
much like a giant vacuum flask, which minimises heat entry.
Liquid oxygen is extremely space-efficient,
since a small volume of liquid yields a very large volume of gas on evaporation.
Gas is drawn off as the liquid evaporates,
the latent heat being supplied from the environment,
and the vessel is periodically replenished by tanker.
So oxygen is stored as a compressed gas in cylinders,
whose gauge indicates contents, and, for the bulk hospital supply,
as space-efficient liquid oxygen kept below its critical temperature in a
vacuum-insulated evaporator, from which gas is drawn as the liquid evaporates.
Explain the workings of the vacuum-insulated evaporator in more detail.
The vacuum-insulated evaporator is the principal means of bulk oxygen storage in
hospitals, and its design elegantly maintains liquid oxygen and delivers gas at a
controlled rate, so its workings repay description.
The evaporator consists of an inner vessel holding the liquid oxygen,
surrounded by an outer shell, with the space between them evacuated to form a
vacuum jacket that minimises heat transfer by conduction and convection,
keeping the contents cold.
Despite this insulation, some heat inevitably enters,
causing a little of the liquid oxygen to evaporate; this is desirable,
because it is this evaporation that supplies the gas.
The pressure within the vessel is maintained within a working range.
When demand is high and the pressure tends to fall,
liquid is drawn off and passed through an external evaporator coil,
where it warms and vaporises to supply gas.
When demand is low and heat entry raises the pressure,
a pressure-raising arrangement and, if the pressure rises too far,
a safety valve venting excess gas, keep the pressure controlled;
an economiser may return cold gas to use.
The contents of the evaporator are measured by weighing,
since the liquid mass is what matters, the vessel resting on a weighing device,
and the level and pressure are monitored with alarms.
The cold gas drawn off is warmed before distribution.
A reserve cylinder bank and an emergency supply provide backup.
So the vacuum-insulated evaporator stores liquid oxygen in a vacuum-jacketed
vessel, drawing off and vaporising liquid to supply gas as demand requires,
controlling its pressure within a working range with safety venting,
its contents measured by weight and backed by a reserve supply.
How do oxygen concentrators work, and where are they used?
Oxygen concentrators are devices that produce oxygen-enriched gas from ambient air,
providing an alternative to stored oxygen that is valuable in particular settings,
and they work by selectively removing nitrogen from air.
The principle is adsorption: air is passed under pressure through a column
containing a zeolite molecular sieve,
a material whose structure preferentially adsorbs nitrogen while allowing oxygen
and argon to pass, so that the gas emerging is enriched in oxygen,
typically to over ninety per cent, the remainder being mostly argon.
Because the zeolite becomes saturated with nitrogen,
the process is operated cyclically: while one column is producing oxygen,
the other is being regenerated by releasing the pressure so that the adsorbed
nitrogen is desorbed and flushed away,
the two columns alternating to give a continuous supply — a technique called
pressure swing adsorption.
The output is therefore not pure oxygen but oxygen-enriched gas containing some
argon, which is generally of no clinical consequence.
Oxygen concentrators are used in several settings:
small domestic units provide long-term oxygen therapy for patients at home,
freeing them from cylinder deliveries;
larger units can supply a hospital or be used where bulk liquid oxygen delivery is
impractical, as in remote or resource-limited locations and in military or field
settings.
Their advantages are independence from supply logistics,
requiring only electrical power and air;
their limitations are the dependence on power, the slightly impure output,
and the need for maintenance.
So oxygen concentrators produce oxygen-enriched gas by passing air through a
zeolite molecular sieve that adsorbs nitrogen,
operated cyclically by pressure swing adsorption,
and they are used for domestic oxygen therapy and to supply hospitals or remote and
field settings independently of stored oxygen.
How is nitrous oxide stored and supplied?
Nitrous oxide is stored and supplied in a manner quite different from oxygen,
reflecting its physical property of being liquefiable at room temperature,
and this has important practical consequences.
Because nitrous oxide has a critical temperature of about thirty-six and a half
degrees Celsius, which is above normal room temperature,
it can be and is liquefied by pressure at room temperature,
and is therefore stored as a liquid in equilibrium with its vapour in the cylinder,
under its saturated vapour pressure of about forty-four bar.
As discussed in the context of the gas laws,
this means the cylinder pressure remains roughly constant while liquid remains,
so the gauge does not indicate the contents,
which must instead be determined by weighing the cylinder.
The cylinders are filled only to a defined filling ratio — the weight of nitrous
oxide relative to the weight of water that would fill the cylinder,
about seventy-five per cent in temperate climates — as a safety measure to prevent
a dangerous pressure rise if the cylinder is warmed and the liquid expands.
As nitrous oxide is withdrawn, the latent heat of vaporisation cools the cylinder,
which can lower the vapour pressure and cause frosting at high flows.
For larger supplies, nitrous oxide is provided from a manifold of large cylinders,
since it is not usually stored in bulk liquid form like oxygen.
The piped supply is delivered, like oxygen, at a regulated four bar.
So nitrous oxide is stored as a liquid under its saturated vapour pressure of about
forty-four bar, its gauge not indicating contents, which are found by weighing;
it is filled to a safe filling ratio, cools by latent heat as it empties,
and is supplied for piped distribution from a manifold of cylinders.
Describe the supply of medical and surgical air.
Medical air and surgical air are supplied to the hospital for distinct purposes and
at different pressures, and understanding their sources and uses is part of a
complete account of the gas supply.
Medical air is air that has been cleaned,
dried and supplied free of contaminants for breathing and as a carrier gas;
it is valued because it provides a carrier gas with the oxygen concentration of air
but without nitrous oxide, useful when the effects of nitrous oxide are
undesirable, and for driving nebulisers and for respiratory support.
It is supplied at the standard pipeline working pressure of about four bar.
Surgical air, by contrast, is supplied at a higher pressure, about seven bar,
specifically to drive pneumatic surgical tools such as drills and saws,
which require the greater pressure;
it is provided through separate pipework and outlets to avoid confusion with the
four-bar supply.
Air is generated centrally in two main ways.
It may be produced by compressors, which draw in atmospheric air, compress it,
and then clean, dry and filter it to remove water,
oil and particulate contamination before distribution,
with reserve receivers to buffer demand.
Alternatively, synthetic air may be produced by blending oxygen and nitrogen from
their bulk sources in the correct proportions.
The supply includes filtration and drying to ensure the air is clean and dry,
and monitoring for contaminants.
So medical air, cleaned and dried, is supplied at four bar as a nitrous-oxide-free
carrier and breathing gas, while surgical air is supplied separately at about seven
bar to drive pneumatic tools, the air being generated centrally by compressors with
cleaning and drying, or by blending oxygen and nitrogen.
What is Entonox, and what special considerations attend its storage?
Entonox is a ready-mixed gas of fifty per cent nitrous oxide and fifty per cent
oxygen, widely used for analgesia in labour,
in emergency and ambulance care and for short painful procedures,
and its storage carries a special consideration arising from the behaviour of the
gas mixture at low temperature.
The two gases are mixed in equal proportions and stored together in a single
cylinder under pressure, the convenience being a self-contained analgesic and
oxygen-containing mixture that the patient can self-administer through a demand
valve.
The remarkable property that allows nitrous oxide and oxygen to coexist as a
gaseous mixture, rather than the nitrous oxide liquefying as it would alone,
is the Poynting effect: when oxygen is bubbled through liquid nitrous oxide,
the nitrous oxide dissolves into the oxygen and the mixture behaves as a gas,
the dissolved nitrous oxide no longer liquefying at the pressures involved.
The special consideration is that at low temperatures,
below a critical temperature called the pseudocritical temperature,
around minus six degrees Celsius at the storage pressure, the mixture can separate,
the nitrous oxide liquefying out; this lamination or separation is hazardous
because gas drawn off first would then be oxygen-rich and later dangerously
nitrous-oxide-rich and hypoxic.
To prevent this, Entonox cylinders must be stored above this temperature,
ideally horizontally and warmed before use,
and if frozen must be warmed and remixed by inverting before use.
So Entonox is a ready-mixed fifty-fifty nitrous oxide and oxygen analgesic mixture,
kept gaseous by the Poynting effect,
whose special storage consideration is the risk of separation at low temperature
below the pseudocritical point, requiring storage above that temperature and
warming and remixing if it has been cold.
Describe the piped medical gas distribution system and its pressures.
The piped medical gas and vacuum system is the primary means of delivering gases
throughout a hospital, and understanding its arrangement and the pressures involved
is important for safe practice and for responding to failures.
From the bulk sources — the liquid oxygen evaporator,
the nitrous oxide and air supplies — the gases are distributed through dedicated
copper pipework to every location where they are needed,
terminating in self-sealing terminal outlets at the wall,
ceiling pendant or anaesthetic machine.
The system is designed with redundancy and monitoring.
Each gas has its primary supply and a reserve,
with manifolds of cylinders providing automatic backup should the primary fail,
the changeover being automatic and signalled.
The gases are delivered to the terminal outlets at a regulated working pressure of
about four bar, or four hundred kilopascals, for the standard medical gases,
with surgical air at the higher seven bar.
The terminal outlets are gas-specific,
accepting only the correct probe through non-interchangeable Schrader connectors,
each gas having a differently configured collar or indexed fitting to prevent
misconnection.
Flexible hoses connect the outlets to the anaesthetic machine,
again colour-coded and fitted with non-interchangeable connectors at each end — the
gas-specific NIST connector at the machine end.
The system is monitored by pressure gauges and alarms that warn of low or high
pressure at central and local panels,
and area valve service units allow sections to be isolated for maintenance or
emergency.
So the piped system distributes gases from bulk sources through dedicated pipework
to gas-specific self-sealing terminal outlets at a regulated four bar,
with surgical air at seven bar, protected by automatic reserve manifolds,
non-interchangeable Schrader and NIST connectors,
and pressure alarms and isolating valves.
Explain the function of a pressure regulator, or reducing valve.
The pressure regulator, also called a pressure-reducing valve,
is an essential component wherever gas is supplied from a high-pressure source,
and understanding its function explains how the very high and variable pressure of
a cylinder is converted to a safe, constant working pressure.
A cylinder of oxygen delivers gas at up to about one hundred and thirty-seven bar
when full, a pressure far too high to supply to the anaesthetic machine and one
that falls as the cylinder empties; the regulator reduces this high,
variable pressure to a lower, constant working pressure, around four bar,
matching the pipeline pressure, and maintains it steady regardless of the falling
cylinder pressure.
The principle of operation balances the gas pressure against a spring acting on a
diaphragm. High-pressure gas enters and pushes against a valve;
the reduced-pressure gas downstream acts on a diaphragm opposed by an adjustable
spring.
When the downstream pressure rises to the set value,
the diaphragm moves to close the valve, and when it falls,
the spring opens the valve to admit more gas,
so that the downstream pressure is held constant at the value determined by the
spring.
This not only provides a safe and constant supply pressure but protects the
downstream equipment from the high cylinder pressure,
allows fine control of flow by the subsequent flow-control valve,
and compensates for the falling cylinder pressure so that flow remains steady.
Regulators incorporate a safety valve to vent excess pressure should they fail.
So the pressure regulator reduces the high and falling pressure of a cylinder to a
constant safe working pressure of about four bar,
by balancing the downstream gas pressure against a spring-loaded diaphragm that
opens and closes a valve, protecting the equipment, steadying the flow,
and incorporating a safety valve against failure.
What engineering safety features prevent the delivery of the wrong gas?
A central concern in the design of the gas supply is the prevention of the
catastrophic error of delivering the wrong gas — above all a hypoxic gas in place
of oxygen — and a layered system of engineering safeguards,
in addition to colour coding and labelling,
is built in to make such errors difficult.
At the cylinder, the pin index system ensures that each gas cylinder can only be
fitted to a yoke configured for that gas:
the valve block of each gas has holes in a unique position,
and the yoke has corresponding pins,
so a cylinder cannot be mounted on the wrong yoke.
At the pipeline terminal outlets and hose connections,
non-interchangeable connectors serve the same purpose:
the Schrader probes at the outlets and the NIST connectors at the machine are
gas-specific in their dimensions, so a hose for one gas cannot be connected to the
outlet or inlet of another.
Colour coding of cylinders, hoses and flowmeters aids recognition but is regarded
as an aid, not a safeguard, the definitive identifier being the label and the
physical non-interchangeability.
Within the anaesthetic machine, further safeguards protect against hypoxia:
an oxygen failure warning device, the Ritchie whistle,
sounds an alarm powered by the failing oxygen itself;
an anti-hypoxia device links the oxygen and nitrous oxide flow controls so that a
hypoxic mixture cannot be set; and oxygen analysis of the delivered gas provides a
final check.
So the wrong gas is prevented by the pin index system at the cylinder,
non-interchangeable Schrader and NIST connectors at the pipeline and machine,
colour coding and labelling as aids,
and within the machine by the oxygen failure alarm,
the anti-hypoxia linkage and oxygen analysis — a layered defence against the
delivery of a hypoxic or incorrect gas.
Describe the oxygen failure warning device and the medical gas alarms.
The detection of a failing or failed gas supply, particularly of oxygen,
is a vital safety function, and a combination of an oxygen failure warning device
on the machine and a system of gas supply alarms throughout the hospital serves
this purpose.
The oxygen failure warning device on the anaesthetic machine,
classically the Ritchie whistle, is designed to alert the anaesthetist immediately
if the oxygen supply pressure falls.
Its essential and elegant feature is that it is powered by the oxygen supply
itself: a reservoir of oxygen sounds an audible whistle as the oxygen pressure
falls below a threshold, so that the warning does not depend on any electrical or
external power that might also have failed.
Linked to this, modern machines incorporate a protection device that,
on oxygen failure, cuts off the supply of nitrous oxide and other gases and may
allow air to be breathed, so that a hypoxic mixture cannot continue to be delivered
after oxygen is lost.
At the level of the hospital, the piped supply is monitored by a system of alarms:
central and local pressure alarms warn of low or high pressure in each gas supply,
displayed at panels monitored by staff, so that a failing bulk source,
a falling manifold or a pipeline fault is detected and acted upon,
with the reserve supplies engaging automatically.
The contents and pressures of the bulk stores are monitored continuously.
So the oxygen failure warning device, the self-powered Ritchie whistle,
alerts the anaesthetist to falling oxygen pressure and triggers cut-off of other
gases to prevent hypoxia, while hospital-wide pressure alarms and continuous
monitoring of the piped supply and bulk stores detect and signal any failure of the
gas supply for prompt correction.
What are the hazards associated with medical gases and their storage,
and how are they mitigated?
Medical gases, though indispensable,
carry a number of hazards arising from their pressure,
their chemical nature and their potential for misconnection,
and a complete account must address how these are mitigated.
The first hazard is that of high pressure: cylinders contain gas at great pressure,
and a damaged cylinder or valve can become a dangerous projectile,
while the sudden release of high-pressure gas can cause injury;
cylinders are therefore robustly constructed, regularly tested,
handled and secured carefully, and valves opened slowly.
The second is fire and combustion: oxygen and nitrous oxide vigorously support
combustion, so that any spark, flame or hot surface,
or the ignition of oil or grease, can cause fire in their presence;
oxygen equipment must be kept scrupulously free of oil and grease,
valves opened slowly to avoid the adiabatic heating that can ignite contaminants,
and gases stored away from heat and combustible materials in well-ventilated areas
with no smoking.
The third is the risk of delivering the wrong gas or a hypoxic mixture,
mitigated by the layered system of pin index, non-interchangeable connectors,
colour coding, oxygen failure alarms and anti-hypoxia devices already described.
Further hazards include the asphyxiation risk of gas leaks in confined spaces,
mitigated by ventilation and monitoring;
the cold-burn risk of liquid oxygen and frosted cylinders;
and the environmental impact of nitrous oxide and volatile agents as greenhouse
gases.
Storage is governed by regulations covering segregation, ventilation,
security and fire precautions.
So medical gas hazards — high pressure, the support of combustion,
wrong-gas delivery, asphyxiation, cold burns and environmental impact — are
mitigated by robust tested cylinders,
oil-free oxygen equipment and slow valve opening,
the layered anti-error safeguards, ventilation and monitoring,
and regulated storage.
Finally, draw together the principles of medical gas supply and storage as they
bear on anaesthetic practice.
Drawing the station together, the supply and storage of medical gases is a
foundational element of anaesthetic practice and patient safety,
because the uninterrupted delivery of the correct gas at the correct pressure is
essential to every anaesthetic, and the system that achieves this rests on the
physical principles we have discussed.
The gases — oxygen, nitrous oxide, air and others — are supplied by two
complementary routes: the piped system from bulk sources,
delivering gas at a regulated four bar,
and cylinders on the machine for backup and remote use.
Their storage reflects their physical properties: oxygen,
with its low critical temperature, stored as compressed gas in cylinders whose
gauge indicates contents and as space-efficient liquid in the vacuum-insulated
evaporator, or generated by concentrators using zeolite molecular sieves;
nitrous oxide, liquefiable at room temperature,
stored as liquid under its vapour pressure,
its gauge not indicating contents and its cylinders filled to a safe filling ratio;
air generated by compressors or blending;
and Entonox kept gaseous by the Poynting effect but liable to separation in the
cold.
Pressure regulators reduce high cylinder pressure to a safe working pressure.
Above all, a layered system of safeguards — the pin index,
non-interchangeable Schrader and NIST connectors, colour coding and labelling,
the self-powered oxygen failure alarm,
anti-hypoxia devices and oxygen analysis — guards against the catastrophic delivery
of the wrong or a hypoxic gas, while hazards of pressure,
combustion and asphyxiation are mitigated by careful construction,
oil-free handling and regulated storage.
So medical gas supply and storage unite the physics of gases with rigorous
engineering safeguards to ensure the safe,
uninterrupted delivery of the correct gas — a system underpinning the safety of
every anaesthetic.
How are cylinder sizes designated, and how is the duration of a cylinder calculated?
Cylinders are manufactured in a range of standard sizes,
designated by a system of letters, and the anaesthetist must be able to calculate
how long a given cylinder will last,
a practical skill essential during patient transfer.
The sizes are designated alphabetically,
the smaller letters denoting smaller cylinders and the contents increasing with
size; the small cylinders carried on the anaesthetic machine and for transport are
of intermediate size, while the large cylinders used in manifolds are larger.
Each size, when full, contains a known volume of gas,
stated on the cylinder and in reference tables — for an oxygen cylinder this is the
volume of gas available at atmospheric pressure when the compressed contents are
allowed to expand.
The duration of a cylinder is calculated simply:
for a gas such as oxygen that obeys Boyle's law,
the available volume of gas can be found from the current pressure as a fraction of
the full pressure multiplied by the full contents, or read from the gauge;
dividing this available volume by the flow rate in use gives the time the cylinder
will last.
For example, a cylinder containing a known volume of oxygen,
delivering at a given flow per minute, will last that volume divided by that flow.
This calculation must always be performed before transferring a patient on cylinder
oxygen, allowing a generous margin and a spare cylinder,
since running out of oxygen during transfer is a serious hazard.
For nitrous oxide the calculation differs, as the gauge does not indicate contents.
So cylinder sizes are designated by letters with contents increasing with size,
and the duration is calculated by dividing the available gas volume,
found from the gauge pressure and full contents,
by the flow rate in use — a calculation essential before any transfer,
with a safe margin and spare cylinder.
Describe the medical vacuum and suction supply.
The medical vacuum, or suction, supply is an essential utility provided alongside
the medical gases, and although it provides negative rather than positive pressure,
it is part of the piped system and warrants description.
Medical suction is used constantly in anaesthesia and surgery — to clear the airway
of secretions, blood and vomitus, to empty the stomach,
to drain surgical sites and body cavities,
and to support various procedures — and a reliable,
powerful vacuum must be available at every anaesthetic and patient location.
The vacuum is generated centrally by vacuum pumps that evacuate air from the
pipeline system, creating a sub-atmospheric pressure distributed through dedicated
pipework to terminal outlets at each location, identified and connected,
like the gases, by a non-interchangeable colour-coded system.
The degree of vacuum is specified to provide an adequate negative pressure and an
adequate flow of evacuated air, with reserve capacity.
At the point of use, a regulator allows the suction pressure to be controlled,
and a collection vessel, or trap, with a filter collects the aspirated fluid and
protects the pipeline from contamination and from liquid and infective material;
an overflow protection prevents fluid entering the pipeline.
The system is monitored by gauges and alarms,
since loss of suction can be as hazardous as loss of a gas,
for instance during the management of a soiled airway.
So the medical vacuum supply provides piped suction generated by central vacuum
pumps, distributed at a controlled negative pressure to non-interchangeable
terminal outlets, with a controllable regulator,
a collection trap with filter and overflow protection at the point of use,
and monitoring — an essential utility for clearing the airway and surgical sites.
Briefly, how are other gases such as carbon dioxide,
heliox and nitric oxide supplied?
Besides the principal medical gases,
several other gases are used in anaesthesia and critical care for specific
purposes, and their supply, generally from cylinders, is worth noting.
Carbon dioxide was formerly supplied in cylinders for addition to anaesthetic gas
mixtures, a practice now largely abandoned because of the danger of inadvertent
hypercarbia, but it remains supplied in cylinders for the insufflation of body
cavities during laparoscopic and endoscopic surgery,
where its high solubility and rapid absorption make it relatively safe for creating
a pneumoperitoneum; it is stored, like nitrous oxide,
as a liquid under pressure owing to its critical temperature above room temperature.
Heliox, a mixture of helium and oxygen,
is supplied in cylinders and used for its low density to improve gas flow through
obstructed airways, reducing the work of breathing in upper airway obstruction;
the helium being inert and of low density,
the mixture flows more readily through the turbulent or orifice-like flow of an
obstruction.
Nitric oxide is supplied as a compressed gas, in low concentration in nitrogen,
in cylinders, and delivered by a specialised system into the inspired gas of
ventilated patients as a selective pulmonary vasodilator for pulmonary hypertension
and hypoxaemia, with careful control and monitoring because of the toxicity of
nitric oxide and of the nitrogen dioxide it can form.
Each of these gases is identified and connected by the same non-interchangeable,
colour-coded safeguards.
So carbon dioxide is supplied in cylinders for laparoscopic insufflation,
heliox for its low density in airway obstruction,
and nitric oxide in dilute compressed form as a pulmonary vasodilator — each stored
and connected under the standard gas safeguards.
How should the anaesthetist check the gas supply before use?
The checking of the anaesthetic machine and its gas supplies before use is a
fundamental safety duty of the anaesthetist, and a systematic check,
following recognised guidelines, guards against the delivery of an incorrect or
interrupted gas supply.
The check covers the gas supplies in several respects.
The pipeline connections are inspected to confirm that each hose is connected to
the correct, correctly coloured terminal outlet,
and a tug test is performed on each to confirm it is securely engaged and not
crossed.
The pipeline pressures are confirmed to be adequate, about four bar, on the gauges.
The reserve cylinders on the machine are checked: each is confirmed to be present,
correctly seated, and turned on momentarily to confirm it contains an adequate
pressure of the correct gas, then turned off with the cylinder contents noted so
that backup is available.
The oxygen supply is specifically tested,
including the operation of the oxygen failure alarm and the oxygen flush,
and the anti-hypoxia device and oxygen analyser are checked and the analyser
calibrated.
The flowmeters are checked to move smoothly and the anti-hypoxia linkage confirmed.
A check for leaks and the correct function of the breathing system, vaporisers,
ventilator and scavenging completes the process.
The check should be performed at the start of each session and a briefer check
before each case, and recorded.
So the anaesthetist checks the gas supply by confirming correct and secure pipeline
connections with a tug test and adequate pressures,
verifying that reserve cylinders are present and adequately filled,
specifically testing the oxygen supply, failure alarm, flush,
anti-hypoxia device and analyser, and checking for leaks — a systematic,
recorded check following recognised guidelines before use.
Comment on the environmental and occupational considerations of medical gases.
The medical gases, particularly nitrous oxide and the volatile agents,
carry environmental and occupational implications that have become an increasing
concern, and a complete account of their supply should address these.
Environmentally, nitrous oxide and the volatile anaesthetic agents are greenhouse
gases, contributing to global warming when vented to the atmosphere through
scavenging, and nitrous oxide additionally depletes the ozone layer and is very
long-lived; the volatile agents differ in their warming potential,
desflurane being the most potent and nitrous oxide significant because of the large
volumes used.
This has prompted efforts to reduce their environmental impact:
minimising fresh gas flows and using low-flow anaesthesia,
preferring agents of lower environmental impact,
reducing or avoiding nitrous oxide,
employing total intravenous anaesthesia where appropriate,
and developing technologies to capture or destroy waste anaesthetic gases.
Occupationally, chronic exposure of theatre staff to trace concentrations of
anaesthetic gases has been a concern,
with historical worries about effects on health and reproduction,
particularly for nitrous oxide; this is mitigated by effective scavenging of waste
gases, good theatre ventilation with adequate air changes,
attention to leaks and technique to minimise spillage,
and monitoring of ambient concentrations against recommended occupational exposure
limits.
So the medical gases raise environmental concerns as greenhouse gases,
mitigated by low-flow anaesthesia, agent choice,
avoiding nitrous oxide and capture technologies,
and occupational concerns from chronic trace exposure, mitigated by scavenging,
theatre ventilation, leak control and monitoring against exposure limits —
considerations of growing importance in responsible practice.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this batch of physics stations. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Medical gases are supplied by the piped system from bulk sources at a
regulated 4 bar (surgical air at 7 bar) and by cylinders on the machine as backup
and for remote use; cylinders are high-pressure steel or aluminium-composite
vessels identified definitively by their LABEL (colour coding is only an aid) with
a pin-indexed valve.
Second, Oxygen (low critical temperature) is stored as compressed gas in cylinders
(gauge indicates contents) and as space-efficient liquid in a vacuum-insulated
evaporator (contents measured by weight),
or generated by concentrators using a zeolite molecular sieve and pressure swing
adsorption; nitrous oxide (critical temperature 36.5 degrees Celsius) is stored as
liquid under about 44 bar vapour pressure - gauge does NOT indicate contents (weigh
it), filled to a safe filling ratio (about 0.75).
Third, Entonox (50:50 nitrous oxide and oxygen) stays gaseous by the Poynting
effect but can separate below its pseudocritical temperature (about minus 6 degrees
Celsius) - store above this temperature,
warm and remix (invert) if cold to avoid delivering a hypoxic then nitrous-rich
mixture.
Fourth, The pressure regulator reduces the high,
falling cylinder pressure to a constant safe working pressure (about 4 bar) by
balancing downstream gas pressure against a spring-loaded diaphragm;
layered anti-error safeguards prevent wrong-gas delivery - pin index at the
cylinder, non-interchangeable Schrader and NIST connectors,
plus the self-powered oxygen failure alarm (Ritchie whistle),
anti-hypoxia linkage and oxygen analysis.
Fifth, Medical gas hazards - high pressure (projectile risk),
support of combustion (keep oxygen equipment oil-free,
open valves slowly to avoid adiabatic ignition), wrong-gas/hypoxia,
asphyxiation and cold burns - are mitigated by tested robust cylinders,
the layered safeguards, ventilation, monitoring and regulated storage.
Thank you. That concludes the station.